<div class="next-subtitled"></div>

# The Triumph and Terror of Wang Huning

October 23, 2021
<https://palladiummag.com/2021/10/11/the-triumph-and-terror-of-wang-huning>

> A member of the CCP’s seven-man Politburo Standing Committee, he is China’s top ideological theorist, quietly credited as being the “ideas man” behind each of Xi’s signature political concepts, including the “China Dream,” the anti-corruption campaign, the Belt and Road Initiative, a more assertive foreign policy, and even “Xi Jinping Thought.”

> While other Chinese teenagers spent the tumultuous years of the Cultural Revolution (1966-76) “sent down to the countryside” to dig ditches and work on farms, Wang Huning studied French at an elite foreign-language training school near his hometown of Shanghai, spending his days reading banned foreign literary classics secured for him by his teachers.

> Wang recorded his observations in a memoir that would become his most famous work: the 1991 book America Against America. In it, he marvels at homeless encampments in the streets of Washington DC, out-of-control drug crime in poor black neighborhoods in New York and San Francisco, and corporations that seemed to have fused themselves to and taken over responsibilities of government. Eventually, he concludes that America faces an “unstoppable undercurrent of crisis” produced by its societal contradictions, including between rich and poor, white and black, democratic and oligarchic power, egalitarianism and class privilege, individual rights and collective responsibilities, cultural traditions and the solvent of liquid modernity.

> As a tumultuous 2020 roiled American politics, Chinese people began turning to Wang’s America Against America for answers. And when a mob stormed the U.S. Capitol building on January 6, 2021, the book flew off the shelves. Out-of-print copies began selling for as much as $2,500 on Chinese e-commerce sites.

> According to a leaked account by one of his old friends, Xi has found himself, like Wang, “repulsed by the all-encompassing commercialization of Chinese society, with its attendant nouveaux riches, official corruption, loss of values, dignity, and self-respect, and such ‘moral evils’ as drugs and prostitution.” Wang has now seemingly convinced Xi that they have no choice but to take drastic action to head off existential threats to social order being generated by Western-style economic and cultural liberal-capitalism—threats nearly identical to those that scourge the U.S.

> This intervention has taken the form of the Common Prosperity campaign, with Xi declaring in January that “We absolutely must not allow the gap between rich and poor to get wider,” and warning that “achieving common prosperity is not only an economic issue, but also a major political issue related to the party’s governing foundations.”

> The best simple proxy to measure this effort in coming years is likely to be demographics.

> I don't know how true the narrative around Wang is, but what China is trying to do w.r.t. engineering it's culture seems significiant
> And I feel they are uniquely equipped to pull it off
> Like historically it seems impossible to "force" cultural change
> But I feel with the amount of realtime data the CCP has on their country, and the control it has, it might be possible to "force" 
> It also seems significiant to me that what China is doing seems slightly crazy. E.g. scrubbing people from the internet and time limiting video games
> Like in the U.S. this stuff would be on the onion
> It's just soooo unlike what the U.S. gov normally does or is able to do
> In the startup world, doing something that seem crazy / ridiculed / don't match any existing patterns are signs that the company may become huge.
> Think of Amazon in the late 90s
> I think of the CCP in the same way 
> I'll end on a more personal note as well
> Recently I've noticed I have a porn problem, and have resolved to just not consume porn (including soft-pornography like half of instagram).
> Like it eats up a lot of my time, and I think it has a negative impact on my mood and relationships with women.
> But like in modern western society, so few ppl actually think of porn as a big problem
> We'll see how abstinence goes for me, but if it goes well, I think it is further evidence that modern western society is kinda poisoning itself with a lot of its culture
> I do wonder if it is a problem only for some. I'd be curious for example if /r/noporn might become much more mainstream in the future.
